ScummVM README
Last updated:    $Date$
------------------------------------------------------------------------

TODO: Resolve all the TODOs scattered through this file before release.

For more information, compatibility lists, details on donating, the latest
release, progress reports and more, please visit the ScummVM home page
at: http://www.scummvm.org/


Table of Contents:
------------------
1.0) Introduction
 * 1.1 About ScummVM
 * 1.2 Quick start
2.0) Contact
 * 2.1 Reporting Bugs
3.0) Supported Games
 * 3.1 Copy Protection
 * 3.2 Commodore64 games notes
 * 3.3 Maniac Mansion NES notes
 * 3.4 Macintosh games notes
 * 3.5 Multi-CD games notes
 * 3.6 The Curse of Monkey Island notes
 * 3.7 Broken Sword notes
 * 3.8 Beneath a Steel Sky notes
 * 3.9 Flight of the Amazon Queen notes
 * 3.10 Gobliiins notes
 * 3.11 Inherit the Earth: Quest for the Orb notes
 * 3.12 Simon the Sorcerer notes
 * 3.13 The Feeble Files notes
 * 3.14 The Legend of Kyrandia notes
 * 3.15 Sierra AGI games Predictive Input Dialog notes
 * 3.16 Mickey's Space Adventure notes
 * 3.17 Winnie the Pooh notes
 * 3.18 Troll's Tale notes
 * 3.19 Known Problems
4.0) Supported Platforms
5.0) Running ScummVM
 * 5.1 Command Line Options
 * 5.2 Language Options
 * 5.3 Graphics Filters
 * 5.4 Global Menu
 * 5.5 Hotkeys
6.0) Savegames
 * 6.1 Autosaves
 * 6.2 Converting savegames
 * 6.3 Viewing/Loading savegames from the command line
7.0) Music and Sound
 * 7.1 AdLib emulation
 * 7.2 FluidSynth MIDI emulation
 * 7.3 MT-32 emulation
 * 7.4 MIDI emulation
 * 7.5 Native MIDI support
 * 7.6 UNIX native, ALSA and dmedia sequencer support
 * 7.7 TiMidity++ MIDI server support
 * 7.8 Using compressed audio files (MP3, Ogg Vorbis, Flac)
 * 7.9 Output sample rate
8.0) Configuration Files
9.0) Compiling


1.0) Introduction:
---- -------------

1.1) About ScummVM:
---- --------------
ScummVM is a program which allows you to run certain classic graphical
point-and-click adventure games, provided you already have their data
files. The clever part about this: ScummVM just replaces the executables
shipped with the game, allowing you to play them on systems for which
they were never designed!

Some of the adventures ScummVM supports include Adventure Soft's Simon
the Sorcerer 1 and 2; Revolution's Beneath A Steel Sky, Broken Sword 1
and Broken Sword 2; Flight of the Amazon Queen; Wyrmkeep's Inherit the
Earth; Coktel Vision's Gobliiins; Westwood Studios' The Legend of
Kyrandia and games based on LucasArts' SCUMM (Script Creation Utility
for Maniac Mansion) system such as Monkey Island, Day of the Tentacle,
Sam and Max and more. You can find a thorough list with details on which
games are supported and how well on the compatibility page. ScummVM is
continually improving, so check back often.

Among the systems on which you can play those games are Windows, Linux,
Mac OS X, Dreamcast, PocketPC, PalmOS, AmigaOS, BeOS, OS/2, PSP, PS2,
SymbianOS/EPOC, iPhone and many more.

At this time ScummVM should be considered beta software, and is still
under heavy development. Be aware that whilst we attempt to make sure
that many games can be completed with few major bugs, crashes can
happen.

If you enjoy ScummVM feel free to donate using the PayPal button on the
ScummVM homepage. This will help us buy utilities needed to develop
ScummVM easier and quicker. If you cannot donate, help and contribute a
patch!

1.2) Quick start:
---- ------------
For the impatient among you, here is how to get ScummVM running in five
simple steps.

1. Download ScummVM from <http://www.scummvm.org/downloads.php> and
install it.

2. Create a directory on your hard drive and copy the game datafiles
from the original media to this directory. Repeat this for every game
you want to play.

3. Start ScummVM, choose 'Add game', select the directory with the game
datafiles (do not try to select the datafiles themselves!) and press
'Choose'.

4. A dialog should popup allowing you to configure various settings if
you wish to (it should be just fine to leave everything at its default,
though). Confirm the dialog.

5. Select the game you want to play in the list, and press 'Start'.

In the future, you should be able to directly skip to step 5, unless you
want to add more games.

Hint: If you want to add multiple games in one go, try pressing and
holding the shift key before clicking 'Add game' -- its label will
change to 'Mass Add' and if you press it, you are again asked to select
a directory, only this time ScummVM will search through all
subdirectoriess for supported games.


2.0) Contact:
---- --------
The easiest way to contact the ScummVM team is by submitting bug reports
(see section 2.1) or by using our forums at http://forums.scummvm.org .
You can also join and e-mail the scummvm-devel mailing list, or chat
with us on IRC (#scummvm on irc.freenode.net) Please do not ask us to
support an unsupported game -- read the FAQ on our web site first.


2.1) Reporting Bugs:
---- ---------------
To report a bug, please create a SourceForge account and follow the bugs
link from our homepage. Please make sure the bug is reproducible, and
still occurs in the latest SVN/Daily build version. Also check the known
problems list (below) and the compatibility list on our website for that
game, to ensure the issue is not already known:

  http://www.scummvm.org/compatibility_stable.php

Please do not report bugs on games that are not listed as being
completeable in the 'Supported Games' section, or compatibility list. We
-know- those games have bugs.

Please include the following information:
    - ScummVM version (PLEASE test the latest SVN/Daily build)
    - Bug details, including instructions on reproducing
    - Language of game (English, German, ...)
    - Version of game (talkie, floppy, ...)
    - Platform and Compiler (Win32, Linux, FreeBSD, ...)
    - Attach a savegame if possible
    - If this bug only occurred recently, please note the last version
      without the bug, and the first version including the bug. That way
      we can fix it quicker by looking at the changes made.

Finally, please report each issue separately; do not file multiple issues
on the same ticket. (Otherwise, it gets difficult to track the status of
each individual bug).


3.0) Supported Games:
---- ----------------
At the moment the following games have been reported to work, and should
be playable to the end:

SCUMM Games by LucasArts:
     Maniac Mansion                              [maniac]
     Zak McKracken and the Alien Mindbenders     [zak]
     Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade          [indy3]
     Loom                                        [loom]
     The Secret of Monkey Island                 [monkey]
     Monkey Island 2: LeChuck's Revenge          [monkey2]
     Indiana Jones and the Fate of Atlantis      [atlantis]
     Day of the Tentacle                         [tentacle]
     Sam & Max Hit the Road                      [samnmax]
     Full Throttle                               [ft]
     The Dig                                     [dig]
     The Curse of Monkey Island                  [comi]

AGI Games by Sierra:
     The Black Cauldron                          [bc]
     Gold Rush!                                  [goldrush]
     King's Quest I                              [kq1]
     King's Quest II                             [kq2]
     King's Quest III                            [kq3]
     King's Quest IV                             [kq4]
     Leisure Suit Larry in the Land of the
     Lounge Lizards                              [lsl1]
     Mixed-Up Mother Goose                       [mixedup]
     Manhunter 1: New York                       [mh1]
     Manhunter 2: San Francisco                  [mh2]
     Police Quest I: In Pursuit of the Death
     Angel                                       [pq1]
     Space Quest I: The Sarien Encounter         [sq1]
     Space Quest II: Vohaul's Revenge            [sq2]
     Fanmade Games                               [agi-fanmade]

AGOS Games by Adventuresoft / Horrorsoft:
     Elvira - Mistress of the Dark               [elvira1]
     Elvira II - The Jaws of Cerberus            [elvira2]
     Waxworks                                    [waxworks]
     Simon the Sorcerer 1                        [simon1]
     Simon the Sorcerer 2                        [simon2]
     Simon the Sorcerer's Puzzle Pack
         - Demon In My Pocket                    [dimp]
     Simon the Sorcerer's Puzzle Pack
         - Jumble                                [jumble]
     Simon the Sorcerer's Puzzle Pack
         - NoPatience                            [puzzle]
     Simon the Sorcerer's Puzzle Pack
         - Swampy Adventures                     [swampy]
     The Feeble Files                            [feeble]

GOB Games by Coktel Vision:
     Bargon Attack                               [bargon]
     Gobliiins                                   [gob1]
     Gobliins 2                                  [gob2]
     Goblins 3                                   [gob3]
     Lost in Time                                [lostintime]
     The Bizarre Adventures of Woodruff
         and the Schnibble                       [woodruff]
     Ween: The Prophecy                          [ween]

MADE Games by Activision:
     Leather Goddesses of Phobos 2               [lgop2]
     Return to Zork                              [rtz]
     Rodney's Funscreen                          [rodney]
     The Manhole                                 [manhole]

Other Games:
     Beneath a Steel Sky                         [sky]
     Broken Sword 1: The Shadow of the Templars  [sword1]
     Broken Sword 2: The Smoking Mirror          [sword2]
     Cruise for a Corpse                         [cruise]
     Discworld                                   [dw]
     Discworld 2: Missing Presumed ...!?         [dw2]
     Drascula: The Vampire Strikes Back          [drascula]
     Flight of the Amazon Queen                  [queen]
     Future Wars                                 [fw]
     Inherit the Earth: Quest for the Orb        [ite]
     Nippon Safes Inc.                           [nippon]
     The Legend of Kyrandia                      [kyra1]
     The Legend of Kyrandia: The Hand of Fate    [kyra2]
     The Legend of Kyrandia: Malcolm's Revenge   [kyra3]
     Touche: The Adventures of the Fifth
         Musketeer                               [touche]

SCUMM Games by Humongous Entertainment:
     Backyard Football                           [football]
     Big Thinkers First Grade                    [thinker1]
     Big Thinkers Kindergarten                   [thinkerk]
     Blue's 123 Time Activities                  [Blues123Time]
     Blue's ABC Time Activities                  [BluesABCTime]
     Fatty Bear's Birthday Surprise              [fbear]
     Fatty Bear's Fun Pack                       [fbpack]
     Freddi Fish 1: The Case of the Missing
         Kelp Seeds                              [freddi]
     Freddi Fish 2: The Case of the Haunted
         Schoolhouse                             [freddi2]
     Freddi Fish 3: The Case of the Stolen
         Conch Shell                             [freddi3]
     Freddi Fish 4: The Case of the Hogfish
         Rustlers of Briny Gulch                 [freddi4]
     Freddi Fish and Luther's Maze Madness       [maze]
     Freddi Fish and Luther's Water Worries      [water]
     Let's Explore the Airport with Buzzy        [airport]
     Let's Explore the Farm with Buzzy           [farm]
     Let's Explore the Jungle with Buzzy         [jungle]
     Pajama Sam 1: No Need to Hide When It's
         Dark Outside                            [pajama]
     Pajama Sam 2: Thunder and Lightning
         Aren't so Frightening                   [pajama2]
     Pajama Sam 3: You Are What You Eat
         From Your Head to Your Feet             [pajama3]
     Pajama Sam's Lost & Found                   [lost]
     Pajama Sam's Sock Works                     [socks]
     Putt-Putt Enters the Race                   [puttrace]
     Putt-Putt Goes to the Moon                  [puttmoon]
     Putt-Putt Joins the Circus                  [puttcircus]
     Putt-Putt Joins the Parade                  [puttputt]
     Putt-Putt Saves the Zoo                     [puttzoo]
     Putt-Putt Travels Through Time              [putttime]
     Putt-Putt and Pep's Balloon-O-Rama          [balloon]
     Putt-Putt and Pep's Dog on a Stick          [dog]
     Putt-Putt & Fatty Bear's Activity Pack      [activity]
     Putt-Putt's Fun Pack                        [funpack]
     SPY Fox 1: Dry Cereal                       [spyfox]
     SPY Fox 2: Some Assembly Required           [spyfox2]
     SPY Fox in Cheese Chase                     [chase]
     SPY Fox in Hold the Mustard                 [mustard]

The following games should load, but are not yet fully playable. Play
these at your own risk, and please do not file bug reports about them.
If you want the latest updates on game compatibility, visit our web site
and view the compatibility chart.

     Backyard Baseball                           [baseball]
     Backyard Soccer                             [soccer]
     Blue's Birthday Adventure                   [BluesBirthday]
     Blue's Treasure Hunt                        [BluesTreasureHunt]
     SPY Fox 3: Operation Ozone                  [spyozon]

The following games are based on the SCUMM engine, but NOT supported
by ScummVM (yet):

     Other Humongous Entertainment games

Please be aware that the engines may contain bugs and unimplemented
features that sometimes make it impossible to finish the game. Save
often, and please file a bug report (instructions on submitting bug
reports are above) if you encounter such a bug in a 'supported' game.


3.1) Copy Protection:
---- ----------------
The ScummVM team does not condone piracy. However, there are cases where
the game companies (such as LucasArts) themselves bundled 'cracked'
executables with their games -- in these cases the data files still
contain the copy protection scripts, but the interpreter bypasses them
(similar to what an illegally cracked version might do, only that here
the producer of the game did it). There is no way for us to tell the
difference between legitimate and pirated data files, so for the games
where we know that a cracked version of the original interpreter was
sold at some point, ScummVM will always have to bypass the copy
protection.

In some cases ScummVM will still show the copy protection screen. Try
entering any answer. Chances are that it will work.

ScummVM will skip copy protection in the following games:

  * Maniac Mansion
  * Zak McKracken and the Alien Mindbenders
  * Loom (EGA)
  * The Secret of Monkey Island (VGA)
  * Monkey Island 2: LeChuck's Revenge
  * Beneath a Steel Sky
      -- bypassed with kind permission from Revolution Software.
  * Inherit the Earth: Quest for the Orb (Floppy version)
      -- bypassed with kind permission from Wyrmkeep Entertainment,
         since it was bypassed in all CD releases of the game.
  * Simon the Sorcerer 1 (Floppy version)
  * Simon the Sorcerer 2 (Floppy version)
      -- bypassed with kind permission from Adventure Soft,
         since it was bypassed in all CD releases of the game.
  * Waxworks


3.2) Commodore64 games notes:
---- ------------------------
Both Maniac Mansion and Zak McKracken run but Maniac Mansion is not yet
playable. Simply name the D64 disks "maniac1.d64" and "maniac2.d64"
respectively "zak1.d64" and "zak2.d64", then ScummVM should be able to
automatically detect the game if you point it at the right directory.

Alternatively, you can use 'extract_mm_c64' from the tools package to
extract the data files. But then the game will not be properly
autodetected by ScummVM, and you must make sure that the platform is set
to Commodore64. We recommend using the much simpler approach described
in the previous paragraph.


3.3) Maniac Mansion NES notes:
---- -------------------------
Supported versions are English GB (E), French (F), German (G), Swedish
(SW) and English US (U). ScummVM requires just the PRG section to run
and not the whole ROM.

In order to get the game working, you will have to strip out the first
16 bytes from the ROM you are trying to work with. Any hex editor will
work as long as you are able to copy/paste.  After you open the ROM with
the hex editor, copy everything from the second row (17th byte) to the
end. After you do this, paste it to a new hex file. Name the new file
"Maniac Mansion (XX).prg" while XX stands for the version you are
working with (E, F, G, SW, or U).  The final size should be exactly
262144 bytes.

If you add the game manually make sure that the platform is set to NES.

Most common mistakes which prevents the game from running:

  * Bad file
  * ROM extracted with the 0.7.0 tools
  * You try to feed ScummVM with the FULL ROM and not just the PRG
    section.

It is also possible to extract the separate LFL files from the PRG
section. To do so use the 'extract_mm_nes' utility from the tools
package.


3.4) Macintosh games notes:
---- ----------------------
All LucasArts SCUMM based adventures, except COMI, also exist in versions
for the Macintosh. ScummVM can use most (all?) of them, however, in some
cases some additional work is required. First off, if you are not using
a Macintosh for this, accessing the CD/floppy data might be tricky. The
reason for this is that the mac uses a special disk format called HFS
which other systems usually do not support. However, there are various
free tools which allow reading such HFS volumes. For example
"HFVExplorer" for Windows and "hfsutils" for Linux and other Unix-like
operating systems.

Most of the newer games on the Macintosh shipped with only a single data
file (note that in some cases this data file was made invisible, so you
may need extra tools in order to copy it). ScummVM is able to directly
use such a data file; simply point ScummVM at the directory containing
it, and it should work (just like with every other supported game).

We also provide a tool called 'extract_scumm_mac' in the tools package
to extract the data from these data files, but this is neither required
nor recommended.

For further information on copying Macintosh game files to your hard
disk see:

  http://wiki.scummvm.org/index.php/HOWTO-Mac_Games


3.5) Multi-CD games notes:
---- ---------------------
In general, ScummVM does not deal very well with Multi-CD games. This is
because ScummVM assumes everything about a game can be found in one
directory. Even if ScummVM does make some provisions for asking the user
to change CD, the original game executables usually installed a small
number of files to the hard disk. Unless these files can be found on all
the CDs, ScummVM will be in trouble.

Fortunately, ScummVM has no problems running the games entirely from
hard disk, if you create a directory with the correct combination of
files. Usually, when a file appears on more than one CD you can pick
either of them.


3.6) The Curse of Monkey Island notes:
---- ---------------------------------
For this game, you will need the comi.la0, comi.la1 and comi.la2 files.
The comi.la0 file can be found on either CD, but since they are
identical it doesn't matter which one of them you use.

In addition, you will need to create a "resource" subdirectory
containing all of the files from -both- "resource" subdirectories on the
two CDs. Some of the files appear on both CDs, but again they're
identical.


3.7) Broken Sword notes:
---- -------------------
Broken Sword 1 and 2 both come with in-game cutscenes compressed using
RAD Game Tools' legacy Smacker(tm) format. As RAD is unwilling to open
the older legacy versions of this format to us, and have requested we
not reverse engineer it, Revolution Software has kindly allowed us to
provide re-encoded Broken Sword cutscenes for download on our website:

  http://www.scummvm.org/downloads.php

These cutscenes are provided in DXA format with FLAC audio. Their
quality is equal to the original games due to the use of lossless
compression. Viewing these cutscenes requires a version of ScummVM
compiled with both FLAC and zlib support.

The PlayStation version's videos are not yet supported and therefore
the DXA cutscenes are also needed.

For systems that are too slow to handle the decoding of FLAC audio, the
audio for these cutscenes is also provided separately as OGG Vorbis
audio. Viewing these cutscenes with OGG Vorbis audio requires a version
of ScummVM compiled with both libVorbis and zlib support.

The cutscenes should be placed in the main game data directory. Note
that currently this requires either copying the game to hard disk or
burning customized versions of the game CDs.

The instructions for the Broken Sword games are for the Sold-Out
Software versions, which are the ones you are probably most likely to
find in stores now.


3.7.1) Broken Sword 1:
------ ---------------
For this game, you will need all of the files from the clusters
directories on both CDs. For the Windows and Macintosh versions, you
will also need the speech.clu files from the speech directories, but
since they are not identical you will need to rename them speech1.clu
and speech2.clu for CD 1 and 2 respectively. The PlayStation version
requires the speech.tab, speech.dat, speech.lis, and speech.inf.

In addition, the Windows and Macintosh versions require a music
subdirectory with all of the files from the music subdirectories on
both CDs. Some of these files appear on both CDs, but in these cases
they are either identical or, in one case, so nearly identical that it
makes little difference. The PlayStation version requires tunes.dat and
tunes.tab.

ScummVM does not support the original cutscene files, so there is no
need to copy them.


3.7.2) Broken Sword 2:
------ ---------------
For this game, you will need all of the files from the clusters
directories on both CDs. (Actually, a few of them may not be strictly
necessary, but the ones that I'm uncertain about are all fairly small.)
You will need to rename the speech.clu and music.clu files speech1.clu,
speech2.clu, music1.clu and music2.clu so that ScummVM can tell which
ones are from CD 1 and which ones are from CD 2. Any other files that
appear in both cluster directories are identical. Use whichever you
like.

In addition, you will need the cd.inf and, optionally, the startup.inf
files from the sword2 directory on CD 1.

ScummVM does not support the original cutscene files, so there is no
need to copy them.


3.8) Beneath a Steel Sky notes:
---- --------------------------
Starting with ScummVM 0.8.0 you need the additional 'SKY.CPT' file to
run Beneath a Steel Sky.

This file is available on the 'Downloads' page of the ScummVM website.
You can place it in either the directory containing the other game data
files (SKY.DNR, SKY.DSK), in your extrapath, or in the directory where
your ScummVM executable resides.


3.9) Flight of the Amazon Queen notes:
---- ---------------------------------
In order to use a non-freeware version of Flight of the Amazon Queen
(from original CD), you will need to place the 'queen.tbl' file
(available from the 'Downloads' page on our website) in either the
directory containing the 'queen.1' game data file, in your extrapath, or
in the directory where your ScummVM executable resides.

Alternatively, you can use the 'compress_queen' tool from the tools
package to 'rebuild' your FOTAQ data file to include the table for that
specific version, and thus removing the run-time dependency on the
'queen.tbl' file. This tool also allows you to compress the speech and
sound effects with MP3, OGG or FLAC.


3.10) Gobliiins notes:
----- ----------------
The CD versions of the Gobliiins series contain one big audio track
which you need to rip (see the section on using compressed audio files)
and copy into the game directory if you want to have in-game music
without the CD in the drive all the time. The speech is also in that
track and its volume is therefore changed with the music volume control
as well.


3.11) Inherit the Earth: Quest for the Orb notes:
----- -------------------------------------------
In order to run the Mac OS X Wyrmkeep re-release of the game you will
need to copy over data from the CD to your hard disk. If you're on a PC
then consult:

  http://wiki.scummvm.org/index.php/HOWTO-Mac_Games

Although it primarily talks about SCUMM games, it mentions the
"HFVExplorer" utility which you need to extract the files. Note that you
have to put the speech data "Inherit the Earth Voices" in the same
directory as the game data which is stored in:

  Inherit the Earth.app/Contents/Resources

For the old Mac OS 9 release you need to copy the files in MacBinary
format, as they should include both resource and data forks. Copy all
'ITE *' files.


3.12) Simon the Sorcerer 1 and 2 notes:
----- ---------------------------------
If you have the dual version of Simon the Sorcerer 1 or 2 on CD, you
will find the Windows version in the main directory of the CD and the
DOS version in the DOS directory of the CD.


3.13) The Feeble Files notes:
----- -----------------------
If you have the Windows version of The Feeble Files, there are several
things to note.

Many of the files necessary for the game are stored in an InstallShield
file called data1.cab, which ScummVM is unable to unpack. You will need
to use the original installer or i5comp to unpack the contents of this
file. The i5comp decompression tool, can be found via a search on the
internet.

To use the speech files with ScummVM, they need to be renamed as follows:
Rename voices.wav on CD1 to voices1.wav
Rename voices.wav on CD2 to voices2.wav
Rename voices.wav on CD3 to voices3.wav
Rename voices.wav on CD4 to voices4.wav


3.14) The Legend of Kyrandia notes:
----- -----------------------------
To run The Legend of Kyrandia under ScummVM you need the 'kyra.dat'
file, which can be found on the 'Downloads' page of the ScummVM website.


3.15) Sierra AGI games Predictive Input Dialog notes:
----- -----------------------------------------------
The Predictive Input Dialog is a ScummVM aid for running AGI engine
games (which notoriously require command line input) on devices with
limited keyboard support. In these situations, since typing with emulated
keyboards is quite tedious, commands can be entered quickly and easily
via the Predictive Input Dialog.

In order to enable predictive input in AGI games, you need to copy the
pred.dic file in the ScummVM extras directory or the directory of the
game you wish to play. This dictionary has been created by parsing
through all known AGI games and contains the maximum set of common
words.

If the dictionary is detected, the Predictive Input Dialog is displayed
either when you click on the command line area (wherever keyboard input
is required, even in dialog boxes), or in some ports by pressing a
designated hot key.

The predictive input dialog operates in three modes, switchable by the
(*)Pre/123/Abc button. The primary input method is the predictive mode
(Pre) which resembles the way "fast typing" is performed at phones. The
alphabet is divided into 9 sets which naturally map to the 9 number keys
of the numeric keypad (0 is space). To type in a word, you press once
the number of the set which contains the letter of the word you intend
to type, then move on to the next. For example, to type the command
'look', you should press 5665. As you gradually type the intended word's
numeric code, the dictionary is accessed for known words matching your
input up to that point. As you press more keys, the prediction converges
to the correct word. This is why the printed word may change
dramatically between key presses.  There exist situations though where
more than one words share the same numeric representation. For example
the words 'quit' and 'suit' map to the same number, namely 7848. In
these cases the (#)next button lights up. By pressing it, you can cycle
through the list of words sharing the same code and finally accept the
correct one by pressing (0)space or the Ok button.

The second input method (123) is the numeric input: Each key you press
is entered verbatim as a number.

The third input method (Abc) is the Multi-tap Alpha input mode. This
mode is intended for entering free text, without assistance from the
dictionary scheme of predictive (Pre) mode. The text is entered one
letter at the time.  For each letter first press the number of the set
which contains the letter you want, then use the (#)next button to cycle
through the letters and repeat with another number. For example, to
enter the word 'look' you must press the following: 5##6##6##5#

The dialog is fully usable with the mouse, but a few provisions have
been made in some ScummVM ports to make its use more comfortable by
naturally mapping the functionality to the numeric keypad. Also, the
dialog's buttons can be navigated with the arrow and the enter keys.


3.16) Mickey's Space Adventure notes:
----- -------------------------------
To run Mickey's Space Adventure under ScummVM, the original executable
of the game (mickey.exe) is needed together with the game's data files.

There is extensive mouse support for the game under ScummVM, even though
there wasn't any mouse support in the original game. Menu items can be
selected using the mouse, and it is possible to move to other locations
using the mouse as well. When the mouse cursor is hovered on the edges
of the screen, it changes color to red if it is possible to walk towards
that direction. The player can then simply click on the edges of the
game's screen to change location, similar to many adventure games, which
is simpler and more straightforward than moving around using the menu.


3.17) Winnie the Pooh notes:
----- ----------------------
It is possible to import saved games from the original interpreter of the
game into ScummVM.

There is extensive mouse support for the game under ScummVM, even though
there wasn't any mouse support in the original game. Menu items can be
selected using the mouse, and it is possible to move to other locations
using the mouse as well. When the mouse cursor is hovered on the edges
of the screen, it changes color to red if it is possible to walk towards
that direction. The player can then simply click on the edges of the
game's screen to change location, similar to many adventure games, which
is simpler and more straightforward than moving around using the menu.


3.18) Troll's Tale notes:
----- -------------------
The original game came in a PC booter disk, therefore it is necessary to
dump the contents of that disk in an image file and name it "troll.img"
to be able to play the game under ScummVM.


3.19) Known Problems:
----- ---------------
This release has the following known problems. There is no need to
report them, although patches to fix them are welcome. If you discover a
bug that is not listed here, nor in the compatibility list on the web
site, please see the section on reporting bugs.

  CD Audio Games:
    - When playing games that use CD Audio (FM-TOWNS games, Loom CD, etc)
      users of Microsoft Windows 2000/XP may experience random crashes.
      This is due to a long-standing Windows bug, resulting in corrupt
      game files being read from the CD. Please copy the game data to
      your hard disk to avoid this.

  FM-TOWNS versions:
    - The Kanji versions require the FM-TOWNS Font ROM
    - ScummVM will crash randomly when using the FM-TOWNS Font ROM for
      the Kanji versions of the following games:
      The Secret of Monkey Island, Monkey Island 2: LeChuck's Revenge
      and Indiana Jones and the Fate of Atlantis

  Loom:
    - Turning off the subtitles via the config file does not work reliably
      as the Loom scripts automatically turn them on again
    - MIDI support in the EGA version requires the Roland update from
      LucasArts

  The Secret of Monkey Island:
    - MIDI support in the EGA version requires the Roland update from
      LucasArts

  Beneath a Steel Sky:
    - Amiga versions aren't supported
    - Floppy demos aren't supported
    - Not a bug: CD version is missing speech for some dialogs, this is
      normal.

  Elvira - Mistress of the Dark
    - No music in the Atari ST version

  Elvira II - The Jaws of Cerberus
    - No music in the Atari ST version
    - No sound effects in the PC version
    - Palette issues in the Atari ST version

  Inherit the Earth: Quest for the Orb
    - Amiga versions aren't supported

  Simon the Sorcerer 1:
    - Subtitles aren't available in the English and German CD versions
      as they are missing the majority of subtitles.

  Simon the Sorcerer 2:
    - Combined speech and subtitles will often cause speech to be
      cut off early, this is a limitation of the original game.
    - Only default language (English) of data files is supported
      in Amiga and Macintosh versions.

  Simon the Sorcerer's Puzzle Pack:
    - No support for displaying, entering, loading or saving high scores.
    - No support for displaying explanation, when clicking on items in
      Swampy Adventures.

  The Feeble Files:
    - Subtitles are often incomplete, they were always disabled in the
      original game.

  The Legend of Kyrandia:
    - Amiga versions aren't supported

  Waxworks:
    - No music in the PC version

  Humongous Entertainment games:
    - No support for printing images


4.0) Supported Platforms:
---- --------------------
ScummVM has been ported to run on many platforms and operating systems.
Links to these ports can be found either on the ScummVM web page or by a
Google search. Many thanks to our porters for their efforts. If you have
a port of ScummVM and wish to commit it into the main SVN, feel free to
contact us!

Supported platforms include (but are not limited to):

        UNIX            (Linux, Solaris, IRIX, *BSD)
        Windows
        Windows CE and Windows Mobile  (including Smartphones and PocketPCs)
        Mac OS X
        AmigaOS
        BeOS
        Dreamcast
        iPhone          (also includes the iPod Touch)
        Nintendo DS
        PalmOS
        PlayStation 2
        PlayStation Portable
        RISC OS
        Symbian
        Maemo (Nokia Internet tablets 770, N800, N810)

The Dreamcast port does not support The Curse of Monkey Island, nor The
Dig. The PalmOS port does not support The Curse of Monkey Island,
Beneath a Steel Sky, nor either Simon the Sorcerer 1 or 2. The Dig will
only work on some Palm devices (those with a large dynamic heap). The
Nintendo DS port does not support Full Throttle, The Dig, or The Curse
of Monkey Island.

In the Macintosh port, the right mouse button is emulated via Cmd-Click
(that is, you click the mouse button while holding the
Command/Apple/Propeller key).

There are unofficial ports to a variety of platforms, including the
PlayStation 3, Xbox, and Xbox 360. Please note that these are not made
by us, so we neither endorse nor can we support them. Use at your own
risk!


5.0) Running ScummVM:
---- ----------------
Please note that by default, ScummVM will save games in the directory it
is executed from, so you should refrain from running it from more than
one location. Further information, including how to specify a specific
save directory to avoid this issue, are in section 6.0.

ScummVM can be launched directly by running the executable. In this
case, the built-in launcher will activate. From this, you can add games
(click 'Add Game'), or launch games which have already been configured.
Games can also be added in mass quantities. By pressing shift + 'Add
Game' (Note that the image turns to 'Mass Add'), you can then specify a
directory to start in, and ScummVM will attempt to detect games in all
subdirectories of that directory.

ScummVM can also be launched into a game directly using Command Line
arguments -- see the next section.


5.1) Command Line Options:
---- ---------------------

  Usage: scummvm [OPTIONS]... [GAME]

  [GAME]                   Short name of game to load. For example, 'monkey'
                           for Monkey Island. This can be either a built-in
                           gameid, or a user configured target.

  -v, --version            Display ScummVM version information and exit
  -h, --help               Display a brief help text and exit
  -z, --list-games         Display list of supported games and exit
  -t, --list-targets       Display list of configured targets and exit
  --list-saves=TARGET      Display a list of savegames for the game (TARGET) specified

  -c, --config=CONFIG      Use alternate configuration file
  -p, --path=PATH          Path to where the game is installed
  -x, --save-slot[=NUM]    Savegame slot to load (default: autosave)
  -f, --fullscreen         Force full-screen mode
  -F, --no-fullscreen      Force windowed mode
  -g, --gfx-mode=MODE      Select graphics scaler (see also section 5.3)
  --gui-theme=THEME        Select GUI theme (default, modern, classic)
  --themepath=PATH         Path to where GUI themes are stored
  --list-themes            Display list of all usable GUI themes
  -e, --music-driver=MODE  Select music driver (see also section 7.0)
  -q, --language=LANG      Select language (see also section 5.2)
  -m, --music-volume=NUM   Set the music volume, 0-255 (default: 192)
  -s, --sfx-volume=NUM     Set the sfx volume, 0-255 (default: 192)
  -r, --speech-volume=NUM  Set the voice volume, 0-255 (default: 192)
  --midi-gain=NUM          Set the gain for MIDI playback, 0-1000 (default: 100)
                           (only supported by some MIDI drivers)
  -n, --subtitles          Enable subtitles (use with games that have voice)
  -b, --boot-param=NUM     Pass number to the boot script (boot param)
  -d, --debuglevel=NUM     Set debug verbosity level
  --debugflags=FLAGS       Enable engine specific debug flags
                           (separated by commas)
  -u, --dump-scripts       Enable script dumping if a directory called 'dumps'
                           exists in the current directory

  --cdrom=NUM              CD drive to play CD audio from (default: 0 = first
                           drive)
  --joystick[=NUM]         Enable joystick input (default: 0 = first joystick)
  --platform=WORD          Specify platform of game (allowed values: 2gs, 3do,
                           acorn, amiga, atari, c64, fmtowns, mac, nes, pc,
                           pce, segacd, windows)
  --savepath=PATH          Path to where savegames are stored
  --extrapath=PATH         Extra path to additional game data
  --soundfont=FILE         Select the SoundFont for MIDI playback (Only
                           supported by some MIDI drivers)
  --multi-midi             Enable combination of AdLib and native MIDI
  --native-mt32            True Roland MT-32 (disable GM emulation)
  --enable-gs              Enable Roland GS mode for MIDI playback
  --output-rate=RATE       Select output sample rate in Hz (e.g. 22050)
  --opl-driver=DRIVER      Select AdLib (OPL) emulator (db, mame)
  --aspect-ratio           Enable aspect ratio correction
  --render-mode=MODE       Enable additional render modes (cga, ega, hercGreen,
                           hercAmber, amiga)

  --alt-intro              Use alternative intro for CD versions of Beneath a
                           Steel Sky and Flight of the Amazon Queen
  --copy-protection        Enable copy protection in games, when
                           ScummVM disables it by default.
  --talkspeed=NUM          Set talk delay for SCUMM games, or talk speed for
                           other games (default: 60)
  --demo-mode              Start demo mode of Maniac Mansion (Classic version)
  --tempo=NUM              Set music tempo (in percent, 50-200) for SCUMM games
                           (default: 100)


The meaning of most long options (that is, those options starting with a
double-dash) can be inverted by prefixing them with "no-". For example,
--no-aspect-ratio will turn aspect ratio correction off. This is useful
if you want to override a setting in the configuration file.

The short game name ('game target') you see at the end of the command
line specifies which game is started. It either corresponds to an
arbitrary user defined target (from the configuration file), or to a
built-in gameid. A brief list of the latter can be found in section 3.0.

Examples:
 * Win32:
  Running Monkey Island, fullscreen, from a hard disk:
   C:\Games\LucasArts\scummvm.exe -f -pC:\Games\LucasArts\monkey\ monkey
  Running Full Throttle from CD, fullscreen and with subtitles enabled:
   C:\Games\LucasArts\scummvm.exe -f -n -pD:\resource\ ft

 * Unix:
  Running Monkey Island, fullscreen, from a hard disk:
   /path/to/scummvm -f -p/games/LucasArts/monkey/ monkey
  Running Full Throttle from CD, fullscreen and with subtitles enabled:
   /path/to/scummvm -f -n -p/cdrom/resource/ ft


5.2) Language options:
---- -----------------
ScummVM includes a language option for Maniac Mansion, Zak McKracken,
The Dig, The Curse of Monkey Island, Beneath a Steel Sky, Broken Sword 1
and Simon the Sorcerer 1 and 2.

Note that with the exception of Beneath a Steel Sky, Broken Sword 1,
multilanguage versions of Goblins games and Nippon Safes Inc., using
this option does *not* change the language of the game (which usually is
hardcoded), but rather is only used to select the appropriate font (e.g.
for a German version of a game, one containing umlauts).

An exception are The Dig and The Curse of Monkey Island -- non-English
versions can be set to 'English.' This however only affects subtitles;
game speech will remain the same.

Maniac Mansion and Zak McKracken
    en  - English (default)
    de  - German
    fr  - French
    it  - Italian
    es  - Spanish

The Dig
    jp  - Japanese
    zh  - Chinese
    kr  - Korean

The Curse of Monkey Island
    en  - English (default)
    de  - German
    fr  - French
    it  - Italian
    pt  - Portuguese
    es  - Spanish
    jp  - Japanese
    zh  - Chinese
    kr  - Korean

Beneath a Steel Sky
    gb  - English (Great Britain) (default)
    en  - English (USA)
    de  - German
    fr  - French
    it  - Italian
    pt  - Portuguese
    es  - Spanish
    se  - Swedish

Broken Sword 1
    en  - English (default)
    de  - German
    fr  - French
    it  - Italian
    es  - Spanish
    pt  - Portuguese
    cz  - Czech

Simon the Sorcerer 1 and 2
    en  - English (default)
    de  - German
    fr  - French
    it  - Italian
    es  - Spanish
    hb  - Hebrew
    pl  - Polish
    ru  - Russian


5.3) Graphics filters:
---- -----------------
ScummVM offers several anti-aliasing filters to attempt to improve
visual quality. These are the same filters used in many other emulators,
such as MAME. These filters take the original game graphics, and scale
it by a certain fixed factor (usually 2x or 3x) before displaying them
to you. So for example, if the game originally run at a resolution of
320x200 (typical for most of the SCUMM games), then using a filter with
scale factor 2x will effectively yield 640x400 graphics. Likewise with a
3x filter you will get 960x600.

They are:
    1x         - No filtering, no scaling. Fastest.
    2x         - No filtering, factor 2x (default for non 640x480 games).
    3x         - No filtering, factor 3x.
    2xsai      - 2xSAI filter, factor 2x.
    super2xsai - Enhanced 2xSAI filtering, factor 2x.
    supereagle - Less blurry than 2xSAI, but slower. Factor 2x.
    advmame2x  - Doesn't rely on blurring like 2xSAI, fast. Factor 2x.
    advmame3x  - Doesn't rely on blurring like 2xSAI, fast. Factor 3x.
    hq2x       - Very nice high quality filter but slow. Factor 2x.
    hq3x       - Very nice high quality filter but slow. Factor 3x.
    tv2x       - Interlace filter, tries to emulate a TV. Factor 2x.
    dotmatrix  - Dot matrix effect. Factor 2x.

To select a graphics filter, pass its name via the '-g' option to
scummvm, for example:

    scummvm -gadvmame2x monkey2

Note #1: Not all backends support all (or even any) of the filters
listed above; some may support additional ones. The filters listed above
are those supported by the default SDL backend.

Note #2: Filters can be very slow when ScummVM is compiled in a debug
configuration without optimizations. And there is always a speed impact
when using any form of anti-aliasing/linear filtering.

Note #3: The FM-TOWNS version of Zak McKracken uses an original
resolution of 320x240, hence for this game scalers will scale to 640x480
or 960x720. Likewise, games that originally were using 640x480 (such as
Curse of Monkey Island or Broken Sword) will be scaled to 1280x960 and
1920x1440.


5.4) Global Menu:
---- ------------
The Global Menu is a general menu which is available to all of the game
engines by pressing Ctrl-F5.  From this menu there are the following
buttons: Resume, Options, About, Return to Launcher, and Quit. Selecting
'Options' will display a dialog where basic audio settings, such as
volume levels, can be adjusted. Selecting 'Return to Launcher' will
close the current game and return the user back to the ScummVM Launcher,
where another game may be selected to play.

Note: Returning to the Launcher is not supported by all of the engines,
and the button will be disabled in the Global Menu if it is not
supported.

Engines which currently support returning to the Launcher are:

    AGI
    AGOS
    CINE
    GOB
    GROOVIE
    KYRA
    LURE
    PARALLACTION
    QUEEN
    SAGA
    SCUMM
    SKY
    SWORD1
    SWORD2
    TOUCHE
    TUCKER


5.5) Hot Keys:
---- ---------
TODO
TODO: Rework this section to clearly state which hotkeys are implemented in *all*
TODO  games (and for which backends).
TODO: It would also be nice to add information about control on devices w/o a keyboard;
TODO  I.e. document how input on DC, DS, PSP, PS2, PalmOS, WinCE, ... works for each game
TODO  Or at the very least give points as to were one can read up on these.
TODO

ScummVM supports various in-game hotkeys. They differ between SCUMM games and
other games.

  Common:
    Ctrl-F5                - Displays the Global Menu
    Cmd-q                  - Quit (Mac OS X)
    Ctrl-q                 - Quit (other unices including Linux)
    Ctrl-z OR Alt-x        - Quit (other platforms)
    Ctrl-u                 - Mute all sounds
    Ctrl-m                 - Toggle mouse capture
    Ctrl-Alt 1-8           - Switch between graphics filters
    Ctrl-Alt + and -       - Increase/Decrease the scale factor
    Ctrl-Alt a             - Toggle aspect-ratio correction on/off
                             Most of the games use a 320x200 pixel
                             resolution, which may look squashed on
                             modern monitors. Aspect-ratio correction
                             stretches the image to use 320x240 pixels
                             instead, or a multiple thereof
    Alt-Enter              - Toggles full screen/windowed
    Alt-s                  - Make a screenshot (SDL backend only)

  SCUMM:
    Ctrl 0-9 and Alt 0-9   - Load and save game state
    Ctrl-d                 - Starts the debugger
    Ctrl-f                 - Toggle fast mode
    Ctrl-g                 - Runs in really REALLY fast mode
    Ctrl-t                 - Switch between 'Speech only',
                             'Speech and Subtitles' and 'Subtitles only'
    Tilde (~)              - Show/hide the debugging console
    [ and ]                - Music volume, down/up
    - and +                - Text speed, slower/faster
    F5                     - Displays a save/load box
    Alt-F5                 - Displays the original save/load box, if the
                             game has one. You can save and load games using
                             using this, however it is not intended for this
                             purpose, and may even crash ScummVM in some
                             games.
    i                      - Displays IQ points (Indiana Jones and the Last
                             Crusade, and Indiana Jones and the Fate of
                             Atlantis)
    Space                  - Pauses
    Period (.)             - Skips current line of text in some games
    Enter                  - Simulate left mouse button press
    Tab                    - Simulate right mouse button press

  Beneath a Steel Sky:
    Ctrl-d                 - Starts the debugger
    Ctrl-f                 - Toggle fast mode
    Ctrl-g                 - Runs in really REALLY fast mode
    F5                     - Displays a save/load box
    Escape                 - Skips the game intro
    Period (.)             - Skips current line of text

  Broken Sword 1:
    F5 or Escape           - Displays save/load box

  Broken Sword 2:
    Ctrl-d                 - Starts the debugger
    Ctrl-f                 - Toggle fast mode
    p                      - Pauses

  Flight of the Amazon Queen:
    Ctrl-d                 - Starts the debugger
    Ctrl-f                 - Toggle fast mode
    F1                     - Use Journal (saving/loading)
    F11                    - Quicksave
    F12                    - Quickload
    Escape                 - Skips cutscenes
    Space                  - Skips current line of text

  Future Wars
    F1                     - Examine
    F2                     - Take
    F3                     - Inventory
    F4                     - Use
    F5                     - Activate
    F6                     - Speak
    F9                     - "Activate" menu
    F10                    - "Use" menu
    Escape                 - Bring on command menu

  Nippon Safes
    Ctrl-d                 - Starts the debugger
    l                      - Load game
    s                      - Save game

  Simon the Sorcerer 1 and 2:
    Ctrl 0-9 and Alt 0-9   - Load and save game state
    Ctrl-d                 - Starts the debugger
    Ctrl-f                 - Toggle fast mode
    F1 - F3                - Text speed, faster - slower
    F10                    - Shows all characters and objects you can
                             interact with
    Escape                 - Skip cutscenes
    - and +                - Music volume, down/up
    m                      - Music on/off
    s                      - Sound effects on/off
    b                      - Background sounds on/off
                             [Simon the Sorcerer 2 only]
    Pause                  - Pauses
    t                      - Switch between speech and subtitles
    v                      - Switch between subtitles only and
                             combined speech and subtitles
                             [Simon the Sorcerer 2 only]

  Simon the Sorcerer's Puzzle Pack
    Ctrl-d                 - Starts the debugger
    Ctrl-f                 - Toggle fast mode
    F12                    - High speed mode on/off in Swampy Adventures
    - and +                - Music volume, down/up
    m                      - Music on/off
    s                      - Sound effects on/off
    Pause                  - Pauses

  The Feeble Files
    Ctrl-d                 - Starts the debugger
    Ctrl-f                 - Toggle fast mode
    F7                     - Switch characters
    F9                     - Hitbox names on/off
    s                      - Sound effects on/off
    Pause                  - Pauses
    t                      - Switch between speech and subtitles
    v                      - Switch between subtitles only and
                             combined speech and subtitles

  The Legend of Kyrandia:
    Ctrl 0-9 and Alt 0-9   - Load and save game state
    Ctrl-d                 - Starts the debugger

  Touche: The Adventures of the Fifth Musketeer:
    Ctrl-f                 - Toggle fast mode
    F5                     - Displays options
    F9                     - Turn fast walk mode on
    F10                    - Turn fast walk mode off
    Escape                 - Quit
    Space                  - Skips current line of text
    t                      - Switch between 'Voice only',
                             'Voice and Text' and 'Text only'

Note that using Ctrl-f or Ctrl-g is not recommended: games can crash
when being run faster than their normal speed, as scripts will lose
synchronisation.

Note for WinCE users: Due to the limited keyboard input in most devices,
a small subset of these hot keys are supported via key remapping and/or
panel actions. Please consult the README-WinCE.txt file.


6.0) Savegames:
---- ----------
Savegames are by default put in the current directory on some platforms
and preset directories on others.  You can specify the save in the
config file by setting the savepath parameter. See the example config
file later in this README.

The platforms that currently have a different default directory are:
    Mac OS X:     $HOME/Documents/ScummVM Savegames/
    Other unices: $HOME/.scummvm/


6.1) Autosaves:
---- ----------
For some games, (namely "Beneath a Steel Sky", "Flight of the Amazon
Queen", all AGI games, and all SCUMM games), ScummVM will by default
automatically save the current state every five minutes (adjustable via
the "autosave_period" config setting). For the AGI and SCUMM engines, it
will save in Slot 0. For the SCUMM engine, this savestate can then be
loaded again via Ctrl-0, or the F5 menu.


6.2) Converting Savegames:
---- ---------------------
Using savegames from original versions, isn't supported by all game
engines. Only the following games, can use savegames from their original
versions.

  Elvira 1
    - Add 8 bytes (savegame name) to the start of the savegame file
    - Rename the savegame to 'elvira1.xxx'

  Elvira 2
    - Add 8 bytes (savegame name) to the start of the savegame file
    - Rename the savegame to 'elvira2-pc.xxx' (DOS version) or
      'elvira2.xxx' (Other versions)

  Waxworks
    - Add 8 bytes (savegame name) to the start of the savegame file
    - Rename the savegame to 'waxworks-pc.xxx' (DOS version) or
      'waxworks.xxx' (Other versions)

  Simon the Sorcerer 1
    - Rename the savegame to 'simon1.xxx'

  Simon the Sorcerer 2
    - Rename the savegame to 'simon2.xxx'

  The Feeble Files
    - Rename the savegame to 'feeble.xxx'

Where 'xxx' is exact the saved game slot (ie 001) under ScummVM


6.3) Viewing/Loading savegames from the command line:
---- ------------------------------------------------

--list-saves:

   This switch may be used to display a list of the current savegames
   of the specified target game and their corresponding save slots.

   Usage: --list-saves=[TARGET], where [TARGET] is the target game.

   Engines which currently support --list-saves are:

       AGI
       AGOS
       CINE
       GROOVIE
       KYRA
       LURE
       PARALLACTION
       QUEEN
       SAGA
       SCUMM
       SKY
       SWORD1
       SWORD2
       TINSEL
       TOUCHE
       TUCKER

--save-slot/-x:

   This switch may be used to load a savegame directly from the command line.

   Usage: --save-slot[SLOT] or -x[SLOT], where [SLOT] is the save slot number.

   Engines which currently support --save-slot/-x are:

       AGI
       CINE
       GROOVIE
       KYRA
       LURE
       PARALLACTION
       QUEEN
       SAGA
       SCUMM
       SKY
       SWORD1
       SWORD2
       TINSEL
       TOUCHE


7.0) Music and Sound:
---- ----------------
On most operating systems and for most games, ScummVM will by default
use AdLib emulation for music playback. MIDI may not be available on all
operating systems or may need manual configuration. If you want to use
MIDI, you have several different choices of output, depending on your
operating system and configuration.

    null       - Null output. Don't play any music.

    adlib      - Internal AdLib emulation (default)
    fluidsynth - FluidSynth MIDI emulation
    mt32       - Internal MT-32 emulation
    pcjr       - Internal PCjr emulation (only usable in SCUMM games)
    pcspk      - Internal PC Speaker emulation
    towns      - Internal FM-TOWNS YM2612 emulation
                 (only usable in SCUMM FM-TOWNS games)

    alsa       - Output using ALSA sequencer device. See below.
    core       - CoreAudio sound, for Mac OS X users.
    coremidi   - CoreMIDI sound, for Mac OS X users. Use only if you have
                 a hardware MIDI synthesizer.
    qt         - Quicktime sound, for Macintosh users.
    seq        - Use /dev/sequencer for MIDI, *nix users. See below.
    timidity   - Connect to TiMidity++ MIDI server. See below.
    windows    - Windows MIDI. Uses built-in sequencer, for Windows users

To select a sound driver, select it in the Launcher, or pass its name
via the '-e' option to scummvm, for example:

    scummvm -eadlib monkey2


7.1) Playing sound with AdLib emulation:
---- -----------------------------------
By default an AdLib card will be emulated and ScummVM will output the
music as sampled waves. This is the default mode for most games, and
offers the best compatibility between machines and games.


7.2) Playing sound with FluidSynth MIDI emulation:
---- ----------------------------------------------
If ScummVM was build with libfluidsynth support it will be able to play
MIDI music through the FluidSynth driver. You will have to specify a
SoundFont to use, however.

Since the default output volume from FluidSynth can be fairly low,
ScummVM will set the gain by default to get a stronger signal. This can
be further adjusted using the --midi-gain command-line option, or the
"midi_gain" config file setting.

The setting can take any value from 0 through 1000, with the default
being 100. (This corresponds to FluidSynth's gain settings of 0.0
through 10.0, which are presumably measured in decibel.)

NOTE: The processor requirements for FluidSynth can be fairly high in
some cases. A fast CPU is recommended.


7.3) Playing sound with MT-32 emulation:
---- -----------------------------------
Some games which contain MIDI music data also have improved tracks
designed for the MT-32 sound module. ScummVM can now emulate this
device, however you must provide original MT-32 ROMs to make it work:

MT32_PCM.ROM     - IC21 (512KB)
MT32_CONTROL.ROM - IC26 (32KB) and IC27 (32KB), interleaved byte-wise

Place these ROMs in the game directory, in your extrapath, or in the
directory where your ScummVM executable resides.

You don't need to specify --native-mt32 with this driver, as it
automatically gets turned on.

NOTE: The processor requirements for the emulator are quite high; a fast
CPU is strongly recommended.


7.4) Playing sound with MIDI emulation:
---- ----------------------------------
Some games (such as Sam & Max) only contain MIDI music data.  This once
prevented music for these games from working on platforms that do not
support MIDI, or soundcards that do not provide MIDI drivers (e.g. many
soundcards will not play MIDI under Linux). ScummVM can now emulate MIDI
mode using sampled waves and AdLib, FluidSynth MIDI emulation or MT-32
emulation using the -eadlib, -efluidsynth or -emt32 options
respectively.  However, if you are capable of using native MIDI, we
recommend using one of the MIDI modes below for best sound.


7.5) Playing sound with Native MIDI:
---- -------------------------------
Use the appropriate -e<mode> command line option from the list above to
select your preferred MIDI device. For example, if you wish to use the
Windows MIDI driver, use the -ewindows option.


7.5.1) Using MIDI options to customize Native MIDI output:
------ ---------------------------------------------------
ScummVM supports a variety of MIDI modes, depending on the capabilities
of your MIDI device.

If --native-mt32 is specified, ScummVM will treat your device as a real
MT-32. Because the instrument mappings and system exclusive commands of
the MT-32 vary from those of General MIDI devices, you should only
enable this option if you are using an actual Roland MT-32, LAPC-I,
CM-64, CM-32L, CM-500, or GS device with an MT-32 map.

If --enable-gs is specified, ScummVM will initialize your GS-compatible
device with settings that mimic the MT-32's reverb, (lack of) chorus,
pitch bend sensitivity, etc. If it is specified in conjunction with
--native-mt32, ScummVM will select the MT-32-compatible map and drumset
on your GS device. This setting works better than default GM or GS
emulation with games that do not have custom instrument mappings (Loom
and Monkey1). You should only specify both settings if you are using a
GS device that has an MT-32 map, such as an SC-55, SC-88, SC-88 Pro,
SC-8820, SC-8850, etc. Please note that --enable-gs is automatically
disabled in both DOTT and Samnmax, since they use General MIDI natively.

If neither of the above settings is enabled, ScummVM will initialize
your device in General MIDI mode and use GM emulation in games with
MT-32 soundtracks.

Some games contain sound effects that are exclusive to the AdLib
soundtrack. For these games, you may wish to specify --multi-midi in
order to combine MIDI music with AdLib sound effects.


7.6) Playing sound with Sequencer MIDI:                          [UNIX ONLY]
---- ----------------------------------
If your soundcard driver supports a sequencer, you may set the environment
variable "SCUMMVM_MIDI" to your sequencer device -- for example, to
/dev/sequencer

If you have problems with not hearing audio in this configuration, it is
possible you will need to set the "SCUMMVM_MIDIPORT" variable to 1 or 2.
This selects the port on the selected sequencer to use. Then start
scummvm with the -eseq parameter. This should work on several cards, and
may offer better performance and quality than AdLib emulation. However,
for those systems where sequencer support does not work, you can always
fall back on AdLib emulation.


7.6.1) Playing sound with ALSA sequencer:                        [UNIX ONLY]
------ ----------------------------------
If you have installed the ALSA driver with the sequencer support, then
set the environment variable SCUMMVM_PORT or the config file parameter
alsa_port to your sequencer port. The default is to try both "65:0" and
"17:0".

Here is a little howto on how to use the ALSA sequencer with your
soundcard. In all cases, to have a list of all the sequencer ports you
have, try the command "aconnect -o -l". This should give output similar
to:

client 14: 'Midi Through' [type=kernel]
    0 'Midi Through Port-0'
client 16: 'SBLive! Value [CT4832]' [type=kernel]
    0 'EMU10K1 MPU-401 (UART)'
client 17: 'Emu10k1 WaveTable' [type=kernel]
    0 'Emu10k1 Port 0  '
    1 'Emu10k1 Port 1  '
    2 'Emu10k1 Port 2  '
    3 'Emu10k1 Port 3  '
client 128: 'TiMidity' [type=user]
    0 'TiMidity port 0 '
    1 'TiMidity port 1 '
    2 'TiMidity port 2 '
    3 'TiMidity port 3 '

The most important bit here is that there are four WaveTable MIDI
outputs located at 17:0, 17:1, 17:2 and 17:3, and four TiMidity ports
located at 128:0, 128:1, 128:2 and 128:3.

If you have a FM-chip on your card, like the SB16, then you have to load
the SoundFonts using the sbiload software. Example:

  sbiload -p 17:0 /etc/std.o3 /etc/drums.o3

If you have a WaveTable capable sound card, you have to load a sbk or
sf2 SoundFont using the sfxload or asfxload software. Example:

  sfxload /path/to/8mbgmsfx.sf2

If you don't have a MIDI capable soundcard, there are two options:
FluidSynth and TiMidity. We recommend FluidSynth, as on many systems
TiMidity will 'lag' behind music. This is very noticeable in
iMUSE-enabled games, which use fast and dynamic music transitions.
Running TiMidity as root will allow it to setup real time priority,
which may reduce music lag.

Asking TiMidity to become an ALSA sequencer:

  timidity -iAqqq -B2,8 -Os1S -s 44100 &

(If you get distorted output with this setting, you can try dropping the
-B2,8 or changing the value.)

Asking FluidSynth to become an ALSA sequencer (using SoundFonts):

  fluidsynth -m alsa_seq /path/to/8mbgmsfx.sf2

Once either TiMidity or FluidSynth are running, use the 'aconnect -o -l'
command as described earlier in this section.


7.6.2) Playing sound with IRIX dmedia sequencer:                 [UNIX ONLY]
---- ------------------------------------------
If you are using IRIX,  driver with the sequencer support, you can 
set the environment variable SCUMMVM_PORT or the config file parameter
dmedia_port to your sequencer port. The default is to use the first port.

To get a list of configured midi interfaces on your system, run startmidi
without parameters. Example output:

  2 MIDI interfaces configured:
          Serial Port 2
          Software Synth

In this example, you can configure ScummVM to use the "Software Synth"
instead of the default "Serial Port 2" by adding a line

   dmedia_port=Software Synth

to your configuration file in the section [scummvm], or setting 
SCUMMVM_PORT=Software Synth in your environment.


7.7) Using TiMidity++ MIDI server:
---- -----------------------------
If you system lacks any MIDI sequencer, but you still want better MIDI
quality than default AdLib emulation can offer, you can try TiMidity++
MIDI server. See http://timidity.sourceforge.net/ for download and
install instructions.

First, you need to start a daemon:

  timidity -ir 7777

Now you can start scummvm and try selection TiMidity music output.  By
default, it will connect to localhost:7777, but you can change host/port
by defining "TIMIDITY_HOST" environment variable.


7.8) Using compressed audio files
---- ----------------------------

7.8.0) Using MP3 files for CD audio:
------ -----------------------------
Use LAME or some other MP3 encoder to rip the cd audio tracks to files.
Name the files track1.mp3 track2.mp3 etc. ScummVM must be compiled with
MAD support to use this option. You will need to rip the file from the
CD as a WAV file, then encode the MP3 files in constant bit rate. This
can be done with the following LAME command line:

  lame -t -q 0 -b 96 track1.wav track1.mp3


7.8.1) Using Ogg Vorbis files for CD audio:
------ ------------------------------------
Use oggenc or some other vorbis encoder to encode the audio tracks to
files. Name the files track1.ogg track2.ogg etc. ScummVM must be
compiled with vorbis support to use this option. You will need to rip
the files from the CD as a WAV file, then encode the vorbis files. This
can be done with the following oggenc command line with the value after
q specifying the desired quality from 0 to 10:

  oggenc -q 5 track1.wav


7.8.2) Using Flac files for CD audio:
------ ------------------------------------
Use flac or some other flac encoder to encode the audio tracks to files.
Name the files track1.flac track2.flac etc. In your filesystem only
allows three letter extensions, name the files track1.fla track2.fla
etc. ScummVM must be compiled with flac support to use this option. You
will need to rip the files from the CD as a WAV file, then encode the
flac files. This can be done with the following flac command line:

  flac --best track1.wav

Remember that the quality is always the same, varying encoder options
will only affect the encoding time and resulting filesize.


7.8.3) Compressing MONSTER.SOU with MP3:
------ ---------------------------------
You need LAME, and our 'compress_scumm_sou' utility from the
scummvm-tools package to perform this task, and ScummVM must be compiled
with MAD support.

  compress_scumm_sou monster.sou

Eventually you will have a much smaller monster.so3 file, copy this file
to your game directory. You can safely remove the monster.sou file.


7.8.4) Compressing MONSTER.SOU with Ogg Vorbis:
------ ----------------------------------------
As above, but ScummVM must be compiled with OGG support. Run:

  compress_scumm_sou --vorbis monster.sou

This should produce a smaller monster.sog file, which you should copy to
your game directory. Ogg encoding may take a considerable longer amount
of time than MP3, so have a good book handy.


7.8.5) Compressing MONSTER.SOU with Flac:
------ ----------------------------------------
As above, but ScummVM must be compiled with Flac support. Run:

  compress_scumm_sou --flac monster.sou

This should produce a smaller monster.sof file, which you should copy to
your game directory. Remember that the quality is always the same,
varying encoder options will only affect the encoding time and resulting
file size. Playing with the blocksize (-b <value>), has the biggest
impact on the resulting file size -- 1152 seems to be a good value for
those kind of soundfiles. Be sure to read the encoder documentation
before you use other values.


7.8.6) Compressing music/sfx/speech in AGOS games
------ -----------------------------------------------------------------
Use our 'compress_agos' utility from the scummvm-tools package to
perform this task. You can choose between multiple target formats, but
note that you can only use each if ScummVM was compiled with the
respective decoder support enabled.

  compress_agos effects     (For Acorn CD version of Simon 1)
  compress_agos simon       (For Acorn CD version of Simon 1)
  compress_agos effects.voc (For DOS CD version of Simon 1)
  compress_agos simon.voc   (For DOS CD version of Simon 1)
  compress_agos simon.wav   (For Windows CD version of Simon 1)
  compress_agos simon2.voc  (For DOS CD version of Simon 2)
  compress_agos simon2.wav  (For Windows CD version of Simon 2)
  compress_agos mac         (For Macintosh version of Simon 2)

  compress_agos voices1.wav (For Windows 2CD/4CD version of Feeble)
  compress_agos voices2.wav (For Windows 2CD/4CD version of Feeble)
  compress_agos voices3.wav (For Windows 4CD version of Feeble)
  compress_agos voices4.wav (For Windows 4CD version of Feeble)

  compress_agos Music       (For Windows version of Puzzle Pack)

For Ogg Vorbis add --vorbis to the options, i.e.

  compress_agos --vorbis

For Flac add --flac and optional parameters, i.e.

  compress_agos --flac

Eventually you will have a much smaller *.mp3, *.ogg or *.fla file, copy
this file to your game directory. You can safely remove the old file.


7.8.7) Compressing speech/music in Broken Sword 1
------ ------------------------------------------
The 'compress_sword1' tool from the scummvm-tools package can encode
music and speech to MP3 as well as Ogg Vorbis. The easiest way to encode
the files is simply copying the executable into your BS1 directory
(together with the lame encoder) and run it from there. This way, it
will automatically encode everything to MP3. Afterwards, you can
manually remove the SPEECH?.CLU files and the wave music files.

Running "compress_sword1 --vorbis" will compress the files using Ogg
Vorbis instead of MP3.

Running "compress_sword1 --flac" will compress the files using Flac
instead of MP3.

Use "compress_sword1 --help" to get a full list of the options.


7.8.8) Compressing speech/music in Broken Sword 2
------ ------------------------------------------
Use our 'compress_sword2' utility from the scummvm-tools package to
perform this task. You can choose between multiple target formats, but
note  that you can only use each if ScummVM was compiled with the
respective decoder support enabled.

  compress_sword2 speech1.clu
  compress_sword2 music1.clu

For Ogg Vorbis add --vorbis to the options, i.e.

  compress_sword2 --vorbis

Eventually you will have a much smaller *.cl3 or *.clg file, copy this
file to your game directory. You can safely remove the old file.

It is possible to use Flac compression by adding the --flac option.
However, the resulting *.clf file will actually be larger than the
original.

Please note that compress_sword2 will only work with the four
speech/music files in Broken Sword 2. It will not work with any of the
other *.clu files, nor will it work with the speech files from Broken
Sword 1.


7.9) Output sample rate:
---- -------------------
The output sample rate tells ScummVM how many sound samples to play per
channel per second. There is much that could be said on this subject,
but most of it would be irrelevant here. The short version is that for
most games 22050 Hz is fine, but in some cases 44100 Hz is preferable.
On extremely low-end systems you may want to use 11025 Hz, but it is
unlikely that you have to worry about that.

To elaborate, most of the sounds ScummVM has to play were sampled at
either 22050 Hz or 11025 Hz. Using a higher sample rate will not
magically improve the quality of these sounds. Hence, 22050 Hz is fine.

Some games use CD audio. If you use compressed files for this, they are
probably sampled at 44100 Hz, so for these games that may be a better
choice of sample rate.

When using the AdLib, FM Towns, PC Speaker or IBM PCjr music drivers,
ScummVM is responsible for generating the samples. Usually 22050 Hz will
be plenty for these, but there is at least one piece of AdLib music in
Beneath a Steel Sky that will sound a lot better at 44100 Hz.

Using frequencies in between is not recommended. For one thing, your
sound card may not support it. In theory, ScummVM should fall back on a
sensible frequency in that case, but don't count on it. More
importantly, ScummVM has to resample all sounds to its output frequency.
This is much easier to do well if the output frequency is a multiple of
the original frequency.


8.0) Configuration file:
---- -------------------
By default, the configuration file is saved in, and loaded from:

    Windows Vista:
    \Users\username\AppData\Roaming\ScummVM\scummvm.ini,

    Windows 2000/XP:
    \Documents and Settings\username\Application Data\ScummVM\scummvm.ini,

    Windows NT4:
    <windir>\Profiles\username\Application Data\ScummVM\scummvm.ini,

    Windows 95/98/ME:
    <windir>\scummvm.ini,

    If an earlier version of ScummVM was installed under Windows, the
    previous default location of '<windir>\scummvm.ini' will be kept.

    Unix:
    ~/.scummvmrc

    Mac OS X:
    ~/Library/Preferences/ScummVM Preferences
    (here, ~ refers to your home directory)

    Others:
    scummvm.ini in the current directory

An example config file looks as follows:

    [scummvm]
    gfx_mode=supereagle
    fullscreen=true
    savepath=C:\saves\

    [sky]
    path=C:\games\SteelSky\

    [germansky]
    gameid=sky
    language=de
    path=C:\games\SteelSky\
    description=Beneath a Steel Sky w/ German subtitles

    [germandott]
    gameid=tentacle
    path=C:\german\tentacle\
    description=German version of DOTT

    [tentacle]
    path=C:\tentacle\
    subtitles=true
    music_volume=40
    sfx_volume=255

    [loomcd]
    cdrom=1
    path=C:\loom\
    talkspeed=5
    savepath=C:\loom\saves\

    [monkey2]
    path=C:\amiga_mi2\
    music_driver=windows

The following keywords are recognized:

    path            string   The path to where a game's data files are
    autosave_period number   The seconds between autosaving (default: 300)
    save_slot       number   The savegame number to load on startup.
    savepath        string   The path to where a game will store its
                             savegames.
    versioninfo     string   The version of the ScummVM that created the
                             configuration file.

    gameid          string   The real id of a game. Useful if you have
                             several versions of the same game, and want
                             different aliases for them. See the example.
    description     string   The description of the game as it will appear
                             in the launcher.

    language        string   Specify language (en, us, de, fr, it, pt, es,
                             jp, zh, kr, se, gb, hb, cz, ru)
    speech_mute     bool     If true, speech is muted
    subtitles       bool     Set to true to enable subtitles.
    talkspeed       number   Text delay in SCUMM games, or text speed in
                             other games.

    fullscreen      bool     Fullscreen mode
    aspect_ratio    bool     Enable aspect ratio correction
    gfx_mode        string   Graphics mode (normal, 2x, 3x, 2xsai,
                             super2xsai, supereagle, advmame2x, advmame3x,
                             hq2x, hq3x, tv2x, dotmatrix)

    confirm_exit    bool     Ask for confirmation by the user before quitting
                             (SDL backend only).
    cdrom           number   Number of CD-ROM unit to use for audio. If
                             negative, don't even try to access the CD-ROM.
    joystick_num    number   Number of joystick device to use for input
    music_driver    string   The music engine to use.
    opl_driver      string   The AdLib (OPL) emulator to use.
    output_rate     number   The output sample rate to use, in Hz. Sensible
                             values are 11025, 22050 and 44100.
    alsa_port       string   Port to use for output when using the
                             ALSA music driver.
    music_volume    number   The music volume setting (0-255)
    multi_midi      bool     If true, enable combination AdLib and native
                             MIDI.
    soundfont       string   The SoundFont to use for MIDI playback. (Only
                             supported by some MIDI drivers.)
    native_mt32     bool     If true, disable GM emulation and assume that
                             there is a true Roland MT-32 available.
    enable_gs       bool     If true, enable Roland GS-specific features to
                             enhance GM emulation. If native_mt32 is also
                             true, the GS device will select an MT-32 map
                             to play the correct instruments.
    sfx_volume      number   The sfx volume setting (0-255)
    tempo           number   The music tempo (50-200) (default: 100)
    speech_volume   number   The speech volume setting (0-255)
    midi_gain       number   The MIDI gain (0-1000) (default: 100) (Only
                             supported by some MIDI drivers.)

    copy_protection bool     Enable copy protection in certain games, in those
                             cases where ScummVM disables it by default.
    demo_mode       bool     Start demo in Maniac Mansion
    alt_intro       bool     Use alternative intro for CD versions of
                             Beneath a Steel Sky and Flight of the Amazon
                             Queen

    boot_param      number   Pass this number to the boot script

Broken Sword 2 adds the following non-standard keywords:

    gfx_details     number   Graphics details setting (0-3)
    music_mute      bool     If true, music is muted
    object_labels   bool     If true, object labels are enabled
    reverse_stereo  bool     If true, stereo channels are reversed
    sfx_mute        bool     If true, sound effects are muted

Flight of the Amazon Queen adds the following non-standard keywords:

    music_mute      bool     If true, music is muted
    sfx_mute        bool     If true, sound effects are muted

Simon the Sorcerer 1 and 2 add the following non-standard keywords:

    music_mute      bool     If true, music is muted
    sfx_mute        bool     If true, sound effects are muted

The Legend of Kyrandia adds the following non-standard keyword:

    walkspeed       int      The walk speed (0-4)


9.0) Compiling:
---- ----------
For an up-to-date overview on how to compile ScummVM for various
platforms, please consult our Wiki, in particular this page:
   http://wiki.scummvm.org/index.php/Compiling_ScummVM

If you are compiling for Windows, Linux or Mac OS X, you need SDL-1.2.2
or newer (older versions may work, but are unsupported), and a supported
compiler. Several compilers, including GCC, mingw and recent versions of
Microsoft Visual C++ are supported. If you wish to use MP3-compressed CD
tracks or .SOU files, you will need to install the MAD library; likewise
you will need the appropriate libraries for Ogg Vorbis and FLAC
compressed sound. For MPEG2 support, libmpeg2 is required. For
compressed save states, zlib is required.

Some parts of ScummVM, particularly scalers, have highly optimized
versions written in assembler. If you wish to use this option, you will
need to install nasm assembler (see http://nasm.sf.net). Note, that
currently we have only x86 MMX optimized versions, and they will not
compile on other processors.

On Win9x/NT/XP, you can define USE_WINDBG and attach WinDbg to browse
debug messages (see http://www.sysinternals.com/ntw2k/freeware/debugview.shtml).


  GCC and MinGW32:
    * Type "./configure"
    * Type "make" (or "gmake", or "gnumake", depending on what GNU make is
      called on your system) and hopefully ScummVM will compile for you.
    * For more information refer to:
      http://wiki.scummvm.org/index.php/Compiling_ScummVM/GCC
      respectively
      http://wiki.scummvm.org/index.php/Compiling_ScummVM/MinGW

  Microsoft Visual C++ 6.0:
    * Open the workspace file "scummwm.dsw" in the "dists\msvc6" directory.
    * Enter the path to the needed libraries and includes in
      "Tools|Options|Directories".
    * Now it should compile successfully.
    * For more information refer to:
      http://wiki.scummvm.org/index.php/Compiling_ScummVM/VS2005

  Microsoft Visual C++ 7.0/8.0:
    * Open the solution file "scummwm.sln"  in the "dists\msvc7"
      respectively "dists\msvc8" directory.
    * Enter the path to the needed libraries and includes in
      Tools|Options|Projects|VC++ Directories".
    * Now it should compile successfully.
    * For more information refer to:
      http://wiki.scummvm.org/index.php/Compiling_ScummVM/VS2005

  Windows Mobile:
    * Please refer to:
      http://wiki.scummvm.org/index.php/Compiling_ScummVM/Windows_CE

  Debian GNU/Linux:
    * Install the packages 'build-essential', 'fakeroot', 'debhelper',
      and 'libsdl1.2-dev' on your system.
    * Install any of these packages (optional): 'libvorbis-dev' (for Ogg
      Vorbis support), 'libasound2-dev' (for ALSA sequencer support),
      'libmad0-dev' (for MAD MP3 support), 'zlib1g-dev' (for compressed
      saves support).
    * Run 'make deb'.
    * Finally run 'dpkg -i ../scummvm-cvs*deb', and you're done.

  Mac OS X:
    * Make sure you have the developer tools installed.
    * The SDL developer package for OS X available on the SDL web site is
      _not_ suitable. Rather, you require a unix-style build of SDL. One
      way to get that is to install SDL via Fink (http://fink.sf.net).
      Alternatively you could compile SDL manually from source using its
      unix build system (configure && make).
    * Type "./configure" in the ScummVM directory.
    * You can now type 'make' to create a command line binary.
    * To get a version you can run from Finder, type 'make bundle' which
      will create ScummVM.app (this only works out of the box if you
      installed SDL into /sw (as happens if you are using Fink). If you
      have installed SDL in another way, you will have to edit ports.mk).
    * For more information refer to:
      http://wiki.scummvm.org/index.php/Compiling_ScummVM/MacOS_X_Crosscompiling

  AmigaOS 4 (Cross-compiling with Cygwin):
    * Make sure that you have SDL installed, you may also need
      libogg, libvorbis, libvorbisfile, zlib, libmad.
    * Type ./configure --host=ppc-amigaos
    * If you got an error about sdl-config, use --with-sdl-prefix
      parameter to set the path.
    * Check 'config.mk' file and if everything seems to be fine:
    * Run 'make'.
    * Cross-compiling with Linux may be as easy.

  iPhone:
    * Please refer to:
      http://wiki.scummvm.org/index.php/Compiling_ScummVM/iPhone

  Maemo:
    * Get Scratchbox environment with Maemo 2.2 rootstrap (2.2 is for 770 and up)
    * Install libmad, Tremor, FLAC, libmpeg2 from source
    * patch scummvm source (some stuff is currently too dirty to be in svn directly)
      patch -p1 < backends/platform/maemo/scummvm-0.11.0-maemo.patch
    * go to backends/platform/maemo
    * run 'make config'
    * run 'make scummvm'
    * create your debian/changelog in top directory
    * run 'make deb' in backends/platform/maemo

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Good Luck and Happy Adventuring!
The ScummVM team.
http://www.scummvm.org/
------------------------------------------------------------------------
