This document is a partial translation of the English README file. The
original document has much more information, so if you cannot find what
you need here and can understand a bit of English, try to look at the
English README file.

For more information, compatibility lists, details on donating, the
latest release, progress reports and more, please visit the ResidualVM home
page at: https://www.residualvm.org/

Table of Contents:
------------------
1.0) Introduction
 * 1.1 About ResidualVM
 * 1.2 Quick start
2.0) Contact
 * 2.1 Reporting Bugs

1.0) Introduction:
---- -------------

1.1) About ResidualVM:
---- --------------
ResidualVM is a program which allows you to run certain classic 3D
games, provided you already have their data files.
ResidualVM just replaces the executables shipped with the game,
allowing you to play them on systems for which they were never designed!

At this time ResidualVM is still under heavy development. Be aware that
whilst we attempt to make sure that many games can be completed with few
major bugs, crashes can happen and we offer no warranty. That being
said.

1.2) Quick start:
---- ------------
For the impatient among you, here is how to get ResidualVM running in five
simple steps.

1. Download ResidualVM from <https://www.residualvm.org/downloads.php> and
install it.

2. Create a directory on your hard drive and copy the game datafiles
from the original media to this directory. Repeat this for every game
you want to play (it is better to use a separate directory for each
game).

3. Start ResidualVM.

If at this stage ResidualVM appears in English instead of <translated
language>, do as follow to change the language:
- Click on 'Options'.
- Click on the right arrow in the tab bar and select the 'Misc' tab.
- Select "<translated language>" in the 'GUI Language' box and click on
  'OK'.
- Confirm the message box that pops-up, click on 'Quit' to quit ResidualVM
  and then restart the program.

Now choose 'Add game', select the directory with the game datafiles (do
not try to select the datafiles themselves!) and press 'Choose'

4. A dialog should popup allowing you to configure various settings if
you wish to (it should be just fine to leave everything at its default,
though). Confirm the dialog.

5. Select the game you want to play in the list, and press 'Start'.

ResidualVM remembers the games that you add. So if you close ResidualVM, the
next time you start it again the list of game will contain all the games
you previously added. You can therefore go directly to step 5, unless
you want to add more games.

Hint: If you want to add multiple games in one go, try pressing and
holding the shift key before clicking 'Add game' -- its label will
change to 'Mass Add' and if you press it, you are again asked to select
a directory, only this time ResidualVM will search through all
subdirectoriess for supported games.


2.0) Contact:
---- --------
The easiest way to contact the ResidualVM team is by submitting bug reports
(see section 2.1) or by using our forums at https://forums.residualvm.org .
You can also join chat with us on IRC (#residualvm on irc.freenode.net) .
Please do not ask us to support an unsupported game -- read the FAQ on our
web site first. Note that the official language of the forum and chat is
English and no other languages should be used.


2.1) Reporting Bugs:
---- ---------------
To report a bug, please create a GitHub account and follow the "Bug 
Reports" link from our homepage. Please make sure the bug is
reproducible, and still occurs in the latest git/Daily build version.
Also check the known problems list (below) and the compatibility list on
our website for that game, to ensure the issue is not already known:

  https://www.residualvm.org/compatibility/

Please do not report bugs for games that are not listed as being
completeable in the 'Supported Games' section, or compatibility list. We
-know- those games have bugs.

Please include the following information:

  - ResidualVM version (PLEASE test the latest git/Daily build)
  - Bug details, including instructions on reproducing
  - Language of game (English, German, ...)
  - Version of game (talkie, floppy, ...)
  - Platform and Compiler (Win32, Linux, FreeBSD, ...)
  - Attach a saved game if possible - If this bug only occurred
    recently, please note the last version without the bug, and the
    first version including the bug. That way we can fix it quicker by
    looking at the changes made.

Finally, please report each issue separately; do not file multiple
issues on the same ticket. (Otherwise, it gets difficult to track the
status of each individual bug). Please keep also in mind that all the
bug reports must be written in English.
