engine-data README
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

access.dat:
This file contains game resource data used by the Access engine.

achievements.dat:
This file contains Achievements and Statistics IDs and localization from Steam and GOG.

bagel.dat:
This file contains essential game data used by the BAGEL engine.

classicmacfonts.dat:
This file contains fonts used for recreation of Classic Mac OS GUI. To generate it,
use the following commnand:

  devtools/dumper-companion.py createmacfonts

cryo.dat:
This file contains a lot of hardcoded tables used by the Cryo engine.

cryomni3d.dat:
This file contains all strings and some file names depending only on platform/localization.
Some filenames depend on the edition, these are handled by game flags in engine code.
Those informations were stored in the original executables.

darkseed.dat:
This file contains essential game data used by the Darkseed engine.

drascula.dat:
This file contains essential game data used by the Drascula engine.

encoding.dat:
This file contains character mapping for CJK encodings to Unicode.

freescape.dat:
This file contains essential game data used by the Freescape engine.

fonts.dat:
This file contains set of free TTF fonts used by Glk, ZVision, Wintermute engines and
our GUI.

fonts-cjk.dat:
This file contains set of free CJK fonts (or other big ones), used in our GUI and
some engines. This file is intended to be big, thus, not suitable for ports with
memory constraints.

grim-patch.lab:
This file contains set of script patches for Grim Fandango game.

hadesch_translations.dat:
This file contains essential data for Hadesch Challenge game.

helpdialog.zip:
This file contains images for Help Dialog.

hugo.dat:
This file contains all the hardcoded logic, strings and fonts used by Hugo
engine. Those information were stored in the original executables.

kyra.dat:
The 'kyra.dat' file is created by extracting hardcoded data, like the
roomtable, inventory names, various strings, tables for shapes and sequence
scripts, from.

lure.dat:
This file contains essential game data used by Lure of the Temptress game.

macgui.dat:
The file contains set of offsets for recreation of Classic Mac OS GUI, used
by Director, MacVenture and WAGE engines.

macventure.dat:
This file contains additional GUI elements used by the MacVenture engine.

monkey4-patch.m4b:
This file contains script patches for Escape from Monkey Island game.

mort.dat:
File created partially by extracting font data from the French executable. It
also contains the French and German translation, as well as a custom-made
English translation.

myst3.dat:
This file contains essential game data used by Myst3 game.

nancy.dat:
File containing various constants, game logic and strings originally embedded
in the games' executables.

neverhood.dat:
This file contains hardcoded game data used by The Neverhood game.

prince_translation.dat:
The file contains translated game texts for Prince and the Coward game.

queen.tbl:
'queen.tbl' contains a list of filenames, filesizes and offsets for the
individual files saved in QUEEN.1. This data was originally included in the
executable. The compress_queen tool adds the information contained in queen.tbl
to QUEEN.1; for this reason neither the freeware FOTAQ floppy version nor the
mp3/ogg/flac encoded need the datafile.

sky.cpt:
This file contains game tables required for playing Beneath a Steel Sky game.

supernova.dat:
File created partially by extracting the German text from the original source
code. It also contains the custom-made English translation.

teenagent.dat:
This file contains essential data used by Teen Agent game.

titanic.dat:
This file contains data, hardcoded in the original executable of Starship
Titanic game.

tony.dat:
This file contains the font table used by the different versions of the game.

toon.dat:
This file contains all the strings hardcoded in the original executables.

ultima.dat:
This file contains scripts and game data used by the Ultima engine.

ultima8.dat:
This file contains scripts and game data used by the Ultima 8 engine.

wintermute.zip:
This file contains additional graphics resources used by the Wintermute engine.

mm.dat:
This file contains all the various strings and data needed for the Might & Magic games.
